content: update future-proofing page + add post-quantum cryptography subpage (#17946)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: public/content/roadmap/future-proofing/index.md

image: /images/roadmap/roadmap-future.png
alt: "Ethereum roadmap"
template: roadmap
summaryPoints:

>   - Post-quantum cryptography protects Ethereum from future quantum computer threats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Post-quantum cryptography ensures Ethereum can survive advanced hardware threats as quantum computing advances 
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

>   - Protocol simplification makes Ethereum easier to maintain and more secure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Protocol simplification makes Ethereum easier to maintain, audit, and secure
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

  - Recent upgrades have already delivered meaningful efficiency improvements
---

Some parts of the roadmap are not about scaling or securing Ethereum right now. They are about making Ethereum **stable and reliable far into the future**. This means preparing for new kinds of threats and removing unnecessary complexity from the protocol.

## Quantum resistance {#quantum-resistance}

> Ethereum uses [cryptography](/glossary/#cryptography) to keep the network secure and protect user funds. Some of these cryptographic methods will eventually be **vulnerable to quantum computers**, a new type of computer that solves certain mathematical problems much faster than today's machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethereum uses [cryptography](/glossary/#cryptography) to keep the network secure and protect user funds. Eventually, some of these cryptographic methods will be **vulnerable to quantum computers**, which can solve specific mathematical problems exponentially faster than classical machines.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> **No quantum computer can break Ethereum's cryptography today.** Current quantum hardware is far from powerful enough. But recent research suggests the gap is closing faster than previously expected. In March 2026, Google Quantum AI published a paper estimating that breaking 256-bit elliptic curve cryptography (the type Ethereum uses for account signatures) could require roughly 1,200 logical qubits, about 20 times fewer than earlier estimates. Google has set a 2029 internal deadline for migrating its own systems to quantum-safe cryptography.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**No quantum computer can break Ethereum's cryptography today.** The hardware required does not yet exist at scale. But recent research suggests the gap is closing faster than previously expected. In March 2026, Google Quantum AI published a paper estimating that breaking 256-bit elliptic curve cryptography (the type Ethereum uses for account signatures) could require roughly 1,200 logical qubits, about 20 times fewer than earlier estimates. Google has set a 2029 internal deadline for migrating its own systems to quantum-safe cryptography.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> Cryptographic transitions take years to plan and execute. Ethereum's security model is designed to last decades. That is why preparation is happening now, not as a reaction to an emergency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cryptographic transitions take years to plan and execute safely. Because Ethereum's security model is designed to last decades, post-quantum preparation was in Ethereum's roadmap before it was in mainstream headlines. Network preparation is happening now to ensure a seamless transition, not as a reaction to an emergency.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

### What is at risk? {#what-is-at-risk}

> Vitalik Buterin has identified **four areas** of Ethereum's cryptography that need post-quantum upgrades:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Four primary areas of Ethereum's cryptography have been identified as requiring post-quantum upgrades:
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> 1. **Consensus signatures (BLS)**: [Validators](/glossary/#validator) use BLS signatures to vote on valid [blocks](/glossary/#block). Quantum computers could break these.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Consensus signatures (BLS)**: [Validators](/glossary/#validator) use BLS signatures to vote on valid [blocks](/glossary/#block). A quantum computer could forge these signatures.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> 2. **Data availability (KZG commitments)**: The [commitment schemes](/roadmap/danksharding/#what-is-kzg) that help Ethereum scale rely on math that quantum computers can attack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Data availability (KZG commitments)**: The [commitment schemes](/roadmap/danksharding/#what-is-kzg) that help Ethereum scale rely on math (specifically, elliptic curve pairing) that is vulnerable to quantum attacks.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> 3. **Account signatures (ECDSA)**: The signature scheme that protects individual Ethereum accounts. A quantum computer could derive a private key from a public key, potentially allowing theft of funds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Account signatures (ECDSA)**: The signature scheme that protects individual Ethereum accounts. When an account sends a transaction, its public key is exposed onchain. A quantum computer could derive the private key from this exposed public key, potentially allowing theft of funds.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

4. **Application-layer ZK-proofs**: Zero-knowledge proof systems used by rollups and other applications rely on cryptographic assumptions that quantum computers could undermine.

<ExpandableCard title="Can quantum computers steal my ETH today?" eventCategory="/roadmap/future-proofing" eventName="clicked can quantum computers steal my ETH today?">

No. No quantum computer today can break Ethereum's cryptography. The work described on this page is preparation for the future, not a response to an active threat. When post-quantum wallets become available, wallet software will guide you through the migration. For now, there is nothing you need to do.

</ExpandableCard>

### What is being done? {#what-is-being-done}

> The Ethereum Foundation formed a dedicated **Post-Quantum Security team** in January 2026. The team's work is tracked publicly at [pq.ethereum.org](https://pq.ethereum.org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethereum is currently the most proactive defender against quantum threats in the blockchain ecosystem. The Ethereum Foundation formed a dedicated **Post-Quantum Security team** in January 2026, and active work spans across multiple client teams and research groups. The EF Post-Quantum team's work is tracked publicly at [pq.ethereum.org](https://pq.ethereum.org).
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

Active work includes:

- **Hash-based signatures (leanXMSS)**: A quantum-safe replacement for validator signatures, built on hash functions that quantum computers cannot efficiently break.

> - **Minimal zkVM (leanVM)**: A tool for aggregating quantum-safe signatures efficiently, so the network does not slow down after the transition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Minimal zkVM (leanVM)**: Because quantum-safe signatures are larger than the signatures currently used, leanXMSS is paired in the Lean Consensus roadmap with a minimal [zkVM (leanVM)](/developers/docs/scaling/zk-rollups/#zkevm-projects#zkevm-projects). This engine will aggregate quantum-safe signatures efficiently, compressing the data by 250x, so the network remains fast after the transition.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> - **Weekly interop testing**: More than 10 client teams participate in regular post-quantum devnets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Weekly interop testing**: More than 10 client teams participate in regular post-quantum devnets.
- **Data availability:** Upgrading the underlying cryptography used to handle large amounts of network data will ensure Ethereum stays fast and affordable to use without risking future quantum vulnerabilities.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

A key part of the transition strategy is **EIP-8141**, which introduces native [account abstraction](/roadmap/account-abstraction/). This allows individual accounts to choose their own signature verification, meaning users could switch to quantum-safe signatures **without waiting for a single protocol-wide migration**. EIP-8141 is being considered for the Hegota hard fork (planned for H2 2026).

The Ethereum Foundation has outlined structured fork milestones targeting completion of core post-quantum infrastructure by approximately 2029. These are planning targets, not guaranteed commitments.

[Read our detailed guide to post-quantum cryptography on Ethereum](/roadmap/future-proofing/quantum-resistance/)

## Simpler and more efficient Ethereum {#simpler-more-efficient-ethereum}

Complexity creates opportunities for bugs and vulnerabilities. Part of the roadmap focuses on **simplifying Ethereum and removing technical debt** so the protocol is easier to maintain, audit, and reason about.

### What has been delivered {#what-has-been-delivered}

Several recent upgrades have made Ethereum simpler and more efficient:

> - **Pectra (7-May-2025)**: Introduced EIP-7702, which lets externally owned accounts temporarily delegate to smart contract code, a stepping stone toward full [account abstraction](/roadmap/account-abstraction/). Also added the BLS12-381 precompile (EIP-2537), onchain deposit handling (EIP-6110), historical block hash access in the EVM (EIP-2935), and increased the maximum effective balance for validators (EIP-7251).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Pectra (7-May-2025)](/roadmap/pectra/)**: Introduced EIP-7702, which lets externally owned accounts temporarily delegate to smart contract code, a stepping stone toward full [account abstraction](/roadmap/account-abstraction/). Also added the BLS12-381 precompile (EIP-2537), onchain deposit handling (EIP-6110), historical block hash access in the EVM (EIP-2935), and increased the maximum effective balance for validators (EIP-7251).
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> - **Fusaka (3-Dec-2025)**: Deployed PeerDAS (EIP-7594), a peer-to-peer data availability sampling system that distributes the data availability workload across the network. Also increased blob parameters, expanding data throughput for [rollups](/glossary/#rollups).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Fusaka (3-Dec-2025)](/roadmap/fusaka/)**: Deployed PeerDAS (EIP-7594), a peer-to-peer data availability sampling system that distributes the data availability workload across the network. Also increased blob parameters, expanding data throughput for [rollups](/glossary/#rollups).
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> - **Dencun (March 2024)**: Introduced blob transactions (EIP-4844) for cheaper rollup data and restricted `SELFDESTRUCT` (EIP-6780) to remove a long-standing source of complexity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Dencun (March 2024)](/roadmap/dencun/)**: Introduced blob transactions (EIP-4844) for cheaper rollup data and restricted `SELFDESTRUCT` (EIP-6780) to remove a long-standing source of complexity.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> - **London (2021)**: Overhauled [gas](/glossary/#gas) pricing with EIP-1559, introducing a base fee and burn mechanism for more predictable transaction costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[London (2021)](/ethereum-forks/#london)**: Overhauled [gas](/glossary/#gas) pricing with EIP-1559, introducing a base fee and burn mechanism for more predictable transaction costs.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

### What is in progress {#what-is-in-progress}

> - **Glamsterdam (planned H1 2026)**: Expected to include enshrined proposer-builder separation (EIP-7732), block-level access lists (EIP-7928), and gas repricing to better align costs with actual resource usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Glamsterdam (planned H1 2026)](/roadmap/glamsterdam/)**: Expected to include enshrined proposer-builder separation (EIP-7732), block-level access lists (EIP-7928), and gas repricing to better align costs with actual resource usage.
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

- **Hegota (planned H2 2026)**: Expected to include [Verkle Trees](/roadmap/verkle-trees/), replacing the current data structure with a more efficient one that enables stateless clients. Also targeted for EIP-8141 (native account abstraction).
- **Ongoing**: Efforts to simplify the [EVM](/developers/docs/evm/), harmonize client implementations, and phase out deprecated features continue across the Ethereum development community.

## Current progress {#current-progress}

As of early 2026:

> **Simplification and efficiency**: Significant progress. Pectra and Fusaka delivered real improvements in account flexibility, data availability, and validator operations. Glamsterdam and Hegota are in active development with clear EIP targets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Simplification and efficiency**: Pectra and Fusaka delivered real improvements in account flexibility, data availability, and validator operations. Glamsterdam and Hegota are in active development with clear targets to make the network more resilient and efficient, while removing external dependencies. 
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

> **Post-quantum cryptography**: Active research and early implementation. The Ethereum Foundation has a dedicated team, funded research prizes, and weekly interop devnets running across multiple clients. However, **no post-quantum code is in production on Ethereum Mainnet yet**. The structured fork milestones target 2029 for completion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Post-quantum cryptography**: Active research and early implementation are underway. The ecosystem has funded research prizes and runs weekly interop devnets across multiple clients, in addition to the research done by the Etheruem Foundation's dedicated Post-Quantum team. While the structured fork milestones target approximately 2029 for completion, early research is producing tangible proof points demonstrating that post-quantum execution is viable today.
```

Reviewer: SPHINCS+ mainnet transaction & active post-quantum execution devnet WIP

Author: Applied, thank you.

**Account abstraction and signature agility**: EIP-7702 shipped in Pectra. EIP-8141, being considered for Hegota, will allow accounts to use any signature scheme, giving users a path to adopt quantum-safe signatures before the full protocol transition is complete.

No part of this work is finished. Timelines are targets, not guarantees. But the scope and pace of active development represent a clear commitment to keeping Ethereum secure and efficient for the long term.

**Further reading**

- [pq.ethereum.org](https://pq.ethereum.org)

> - [Post-quantum cryptography on Ethereum](/roadmap/future-proofing/quantum-resistance/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Post-quantum cryptography on Ethereum](/roadmap/future-proofing/quantum-resistance/)
- [Privacy Stewards of Ethereum: Post-Quantum Cryptography and Ethereum](https://pse.dev/projects/post-quantum-cryptography) 
- [lean week: leanVM + PQ workshops, Cambridge 2025](https://github.com/leanEthereum/pm/blob/main/workshops-and-interops/2025/lean-week-cambridge/index.md)
```

Author: Applied, thank you.

## Current progress {#current-progress}

As of early 2026:

**Simplification and efficiency**: Significant progress. Pectra and Fusaka delivered real improvements in account flexibility, data availability, and validator operations. Glamsterdam and Hegotá are in active development with clear EIP targets.

**Post-quantum cryptography**: Active research and early implementation. The Ethereum Foundation has a dedicated team, funded research prizes, and weekly interop devnets running across multiple clients. However, **no post-quantum code is in production on Ethereum Mainnet yet**. The structured fork milestones target 2029 for completion.

**Account abstraction and signature agility**: EIP-7702 shipped in Pectra. EIP-8141, being considered for Hegotá, will allow accounts to use any signature scheme, giving users a path to adopt quantum-safe signatures before the full protocol transition is complete.

No part of this work is finished. Timelines are targets, not guarantees. But the scope and pace of active development represent a clear commitment to keeping Ethereum secure and efficient for the long term.

**Further reading**

- [pq.ethereum.org](https://pq.ethereum.org)

> - [Post-quantum cryptography on Ethereum](/roadmap/future-proofing/quantum-resistance/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Post-quantum cryptography on Ethereum](/roadmap/future-proofing/quantum-resistance/)
- [strawmap.org](https://strawmap.org/) - _EF Architecture_

```

Author: Applied, thank you.

### What has been delivered {#what-has-been-delivered}

Several recent upgrades have made Ethereum simpler and more efficient:

- **[Pectra (7-May-2025)](/roadmap/pectra/)**: Introduced EIP-7702, which lets externally owned accounts temporarily delegate to smart contract code, a stepping stone toward full [account abstraction](/roadmap/account-abstraction/). Also added the BLS12-381 precompile (EIP-2537), onchain deposit handling (EIP-6110), historical block hash access in the EVM (EIP-2935), and increased the maximum effective balance for validators (EIP-7251).
- **[Fusaka (3-Dec-2025)](/roadmap/fusaka/)**: Deployed PeerDAS (EIP-7594), a peer-to-peer data availability sampling system that distributes the data availability workload across the network. Also increased blob parameters, expanding data throughput for [rollups](/glossary/#rollups).
- **[Dencun (March 2024)](/roadmap/dencun/)**: Introduced blob transactions (EIP-4844) for cheaper rollup data and restricted `SELFDESTRUCT` (EIP-6780) to remove a long-standing source of complexity.

> - **[London (2021)](/ethereum-forks/#london)**: Overhauled [gas](/glossary/#gas) pricing with EIP-1559, introducing a base fee and burn mechanism for more predictable transaction costs.

Reviewer 2: Just noting inconsistency in how we're displaying date here, consider:

```suggestion
- **[Pectra (May 2025)](/roadmap/pectra/)**: Introduced EIP-7702, which lets externally owned accounts temporarily delegate to smart contract code, a stepping stone toward full [account abstraction](/roadmap/account-abstraction/). Also added the BLS12-381 precompile (EIP-2537), onchain deposit handling (EIP-6110), historical block hash access in the EVM (EIP-2935), and increased the maximum effective balance for validators (EIP-7251).
- **[Fusaka (December 2025)](/roadmap/fusaka/)**: Deployed PeerDAS (EIP-7594), a peer-to-peer data availability sampling system that distributes the data availability workload across the network. Also increased blob parameters, expanding data throughput for [rollups](/glossary/#rollups).
- **[Dencun (March 2024)](/roadmap/dencun/)**: Introduced blob transactions (EIP-4844) for cheaper rollup data and restricted `SELFDESTRUCT` (EIP-6780) to remove a long-standing source of complexity.
- **[London (August 2021)](/ethereum-forks/#london)**: Overhauled [gas](/glossary/#gas) pricing with EIP-1559, introducing a base fee and burn mechanism for more predictable transaction costs.
```
